 In the world of finance, we are often quick to forget the tragedies of the past. Yet valuable lessons are to be had by exploring their causes and effects. After all, in the world of ever changing rules, products, and services, history is the one constant that can guide us through the ambiguity. So let's take a five minute history lesson on today's Clean Bagel. It's the early 2000s, and investors are looking for new, safe sources of return. Sox and bonds are still pretty popular, but the tech bubble at the turn of the century showed them that getting your money back from bankrupt firms can be a bit difficult. But what about mortgages? That's right, mortgages. The loan you take out when you want to buy a home. After all, for mortgage lenders, these loans are a lot like bonds with bonuses. You receive regular interest payments, and if the borrowers default, you get a position of their house. Which is a handy fallback because with real estate prices on the rise, recovering your losses is no problem. But investors don't want to buy the individual mortgages of Kate, Sue, and Bill down the road. No, my friend, that's where investment banks come in. These institutions, with their large capital and industry expertise, decide to buy up mountains of mortgages from lenders, pull them together, and then sell shares of the pool to investors as mortgage-backed securities. Meaning the home buyers now pay investors their mortgage payments. Ain't that nifty? Investors sure think so, and soon enough, people are flocking to investing banks to buy up their securities, and snatches banks doing this. The government, in an attempt to boost mortgage lending, is using the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two sponsored corporations to do the same thing. Soon enough, lenders are facing a seemingly endless demand for the mortgages, which they're more than happy to part with. Because every time they sell the rights to their interest payments, they get their money back, which they can loan out again. So mortgage lending and home buying kick-and-diper drive. And investors are getting pretty rich in the process. But other companies seeing the green term running full speed in the investment space are feeling left out, and insurers, wanting to cash in too, begin to sell credit default swaps. Derivatives that pay out if a mortgage borrower defaults. It looks like a foolproof way of making money. In fact, why stop at just one policy per property when there are speculators interested in buying them too? Sure, selling ten policies on the same mortgage may seem excessive and dangerous, but so long as we don't experience a collapse in the real estate market, it's free money. Soon enough, the amount of credit insured jumps from 900 billion to over $62 trillion. And while we probably don't have enough money to cover that, so long as things keep trucking along, insurers are making banks. And all is right in the world, with rising housing and supporting this great supply chain that we've created. Or at least it's supposed to be happening. But something's changing. Because lenders are selling their loans, they've lost all incentive to avoid risk. And with such a high demand for their mortgages, they're starting to give loans to borrowers with bad credit scores and low income. And hold on a sec. Some of those subprime loans are predatory. Don't be fooled, borrowers. That may look like a low interest mortgage, but it's chock full of terrible conditions. But the subprime borrowers don't seem to notice the fine print. And soon enough, everyone is buying a home despite some having no possible way of paying off their mortgage. And investment banks are still gobbling up whatever the lenders are throwing at them. Meaning that this taking time bombs are making their way into the MBS's owned by investors. But that's not all. Investment banks are selling collateralized debt obligations similar to the MBS, but riskier, in claiming that they're virtually risk-free, even as they fill up with these toxic assets. But that's not all again. Despite they're only being so many mortgages to invest in, people are using complex derivative investments like synthetic CVOs to bet even more on whether people will make the mortgage payments, which in case you haven't noticed, is becoming less likely. Now, surely the rating agencies will notice the heightened default risk and let investors know, hey, by the way, your holdings are full of crap. But wait, are you kidding? Triple A safety rating? Well, everyone, we've done it. We don't have a system where lenders don't care about whether mortgage payments are made. Investment bankers don't care about risk, and the rating agencies design for the people, but paid for by the banks don't care about investors. And for a while, this web of liability and risk holds firm, but it's only matter of time before the subprime borrowers start to default. And by October 2007, 3% of all US home loans are in the foreclosure process, with another 7% one month past due. Mortgage investments are starting to turn into real estate, and investment banks are flooding the market with foreclosed homes. Soon enough, supply is starting to outpace demand, and in 2008, housing prices do something that nobody prepared for. They start to free call. And so begins the domino effect that was a 2008 financial crisis. Finance companies involved in the real estate gain take a hit, and despite 75% of CDOs receiving the highest safety rating, 70% of them default. Investment banks, seeing the carnage they've caused, stop buying mortgages from lenders, and the insurers find themselves facing impossible payouts. Banks, lenders, and insurers start to shut down. And despite the government trying to save the largest players from the brink of destruction, on September 15th, we see the largest bankruptcy in US history. As Lehman Brothers, an investment bank with $600 billion in assets, goes under. At this point, anyone with money to spare pulls it out of the markets and places it into treasury bonds, which leads to the Dow Jones to lose a third of its value. And companies relying on loans to operate suddenly lose access to vital financing. Countries with ties to the US are caught up in the disaster too. By 2009, the global economic engine stalls. Two million American jobs would be lost in the last four months of 2008 alone. And while the recession would technically end in June 2009, the impact of the crisis would be felt for long afterwards. And the kicker too at all, despite financial institutions causing the whole disaster, they received the most money from the government's rescue attempts. While the Dodd-Frank Act would be introduced in 2010 to crack down on the lending practices of financial institutions, one would hope that we never again need regulation to remind us that greed should never trump common sense and decency.