 Hello, everyone, and welcome to the 10th week of the course. This week we are actually talking about a category of illnesses, disorders that I find particularly interesting. It may just be my particular background in mental health work, but this is a group of disorders that is unusual compared to the other disorders. What we're really saying with personality disorders is that your personality is the problem. Back when I started in school, one of the debates, it was beginning to end around that time, but it was still ongoing. But whether there is even such a thing as a personality or whether it is an illusion based on just our pattern of responses to our environment and taking a very behavioral perspective on how we learned to react to our environment and that there's no real such thing as what we thought of as personality. That's sort of followed by the wayside that now is recognized that we do have personality, which is this general pattern of how we react to our environment that's unique to us, and that carries over from situation to situation and interaction, and interaction particularly when dealing with other people. Not as much as dealing with situational factors outside of interpersonal factors. Also, I mean during my career, we went from trying to figure out what are the basic personality structures that everybody has. There were a number of tests that I had to learn to administer that really looked at huge numbers of different personality factors. There was something like the 16PF, which was the 16 personality factors. We've since developed more into the five factor model for personality, and that five factor model is really the dominant model now saying there are basically five personality traits, and that everything can really be brought down into a part of one of those personality traits or combination of those two of those five personality traits. We have the idea that a personality is this fixed method that's made up of five basic factors that it can be measured across a variety of interpersonal interactions. It's consistent. We're the same person from day to day, and that consistency is based on our personality as opposed to that consistency being a result of the just our history, behavioral history of stimulus response with our environment, shaping us over time. There's something more than that. It's something more inherent that we have a personality. And that personality is probably results from a combination of different factors, development going to develop it. Some of it's genetic, some of it's biological, the maybe separate from genetics. Some of it might be really learning. Some of it might be the result of a particular major events that occur, but whatever however it develops, we have this idea of a personality. With personality disorders, what we're saying is that your personality is realness. That pattern you have of just reacting, particularly to people, but to your environment, over time is the problem. You don't have a particular type of disorder like depression, where you've got a cluster of symptoms that can be treated, and then they go away, which gets freni out, where you have a once again a cluster of symptoms that can be treated with medication. That cluster of symptoms develops, it interferes with your life, you get treated, and then you try to either live with the disorder or the disorder goes away. The question is, in the minds of many people, is a personality disorder? Is the fact that your personality is the actual illness you have? Is that the problem? Is that the illness? As it is, these are disorder. Your mental disorder is your personality. That's an interesting issue. They began to think of the idea of a personality disorder in 1980 when the DSM-3 came out. Through the 3R, the 4TR, they've kept personality disorders, but with 3, they used to, as the texts spoke about in an earlier chapter on diagnostic systems, earlier symptom versions of the DSM, what they refer to as a multi-axial format. The personality disorders were on their own separate access. That access had developmental issues. It would include learning disabilities, it would include mental disabilities that started in childhood cognitive disabilities. Perhaps issues you were born with, such as Down syndrome and cognitive disabilities that began at birth. They would all fall into that category as well as personality disorders. Because personality disorders were seen as something that developed in childhood, really showed themselves in middle-late adolescence, and then went on through life. They began to throw some ideas out because a lot of what they referred to as the more the access-1 disorders, things like anxiety and depression, were also found to have started earlier and turned a developmental period of childhood in adolescence. They tossed the way that idea of those being on separate access and moved the personality disorders in with all the other disorders, which means that they now think of a personality disorder similar to the way they would think of as a panic disorder or a bipolar disorder as an illness that needs to be investigated and treated. And while you can have some medications that will have some control of some of the symptomatology associated with the illness, you can't treat away a personality disorder with medication. It's not as if you take some special drug that's going to make your personality more normal, less maladjusted. You are maladjusted because your personality is maladjusted. That's how we tend to think of a personality disorder. It is somebody that routinely, in a variety of situations, has a maladjusted response to their environment. So that's really the first question. What are your thoughts about thinking of having your personality be your illness, that your personality becomes your problem, your disorder, your maladjusted due to that basic part of yourself, your personality? Do you think that is the same as other types of disorders, like depression, panic, bipolar, schizophrenia, sleep disorders, eating disorders? The types of disorders we've been talking about, does this really fit into the same category of that as the rest of that, as the new DSM-5 and the 5 TR talk about it? So that's the first topic for the week. What do you think of this idea of your personality as your disorder? Secondly, I wanted to raise the issue around borderline personality disorder. On the first section of a few videos, I would encourage you to watch them about what is borderline personality disorder. Because that really gives you the idea about what the type of things that people talk about is the illness and focusing on that one because and one of the reasons focusing on that one, as you see in that list I have in the second form, is it is by far the most researched as the most academic writing on it. And now if we take Google as indicative of how much emphasis there is out there on the broader community on a particular area, on a particular topic, you see if you put in borderline personality disorder treatment. And make sure you put quotes around borderline personality disorder. You get some massive number. I mean for the day I did it for this course, it popped up to almost 9 million. I did it, that was just a few days ago, I did it again this morning just before doing this video, it was 10.8 million. On borderline personality disorder treatment, and then I went to the next one, anti-social personality disorder treatment. And the number was around 1.9, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10 of the number of borderline personality disorders. And then it goes down from there on the other personality disorders. They're all considered illnesses in the book. They all have their own set of diagnostic criteria. And interestingly your textbook spends much more time on anti-social personality disorder than it does on borderline personality disorder. Yet the research literature, the clinical literature, if you go to a hospital, you'll find groups for borderline personality disorder. You won't find groups for other personality disorders often. If you go to the Canadian Mental Health Association, you'll see groups for borderline personality disorder, but not for other disorders. You won't find, for example, a Schesoid Personality Disorder Group with the Canadian Mental Health Association, but you could very well find a borderline personality disorder group. It's not 10 times more prevalent than all of the other personality disorders combined. But my gosh, it is a huge amount of clinical research, clinical time. Clinical resources goes into borderline personality disorder. We have here at the hospital teams that work with that disorder. You can go yourself and just do that same Google search that I did. You'll get slightly different numbers because I think, for example, the algorithm, the search algorithm, there's tweaks always a bit from day to day depending on who you are, what you've searched for in the past. That will always get you a slightly different number. Just day to day. But your respective of that, you'll always come up with this pattern borderline way up at the top and everything else less. So the numbers will vary day by day, but the underlying pattern is always there. What is it about borderline personality disorder that you think causes it to take up so much of the air in the diagnostic and clinical room? Why is it pulling so much compared to all of these other disorders combined? It gets more attention. So curious about what you think it is about borderline personality disorder compared to all of the others that makes it so much more an issue. That's the second topic. Third topic has to do with antisocial personality disorder people tend to find the stories of the antisocial personality interesting. But for me, one of the more interesting aspects goes back to this issue that we talked about in earlier weeks, which is how do you determine responsibility? So I mean, you take a look at the diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality disorder. I'm just going to read it straight from the DSM 5TR. Provecive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others. That's the symptom occurring since age of 15 years. So it's been around for a long time. It's not like a one-off thing. This is just your pattern of dealing with the world. By as indicated by three or more of the following. The things you have to demonstrate to have the illness, a failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors as indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest. So basically a symptom of having the illness is doing things that would be grounds for being arrested. Secondly, deceitfulness as indicated by repeated lying use of aliases or conning others for personal profit or pleasure. Once again, that is a symptom of your illness. Impulsivity failure to plan ahead. Irritability and aggressiveness as indicated by repeated physical fights for assaults. That's a symptom of your illness. Reckless disregard for the safety of others, for self-reathers. Consistent irresponsibility is indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent work behavior or on or financial obligations. So not honoring financial obligations as a mental health symptom. And lack of remorse is indicated as being indifferent or rationalizing, having hurt, mistreated or stolen from somebody. So not caring if you hurt somebody or steal from them. That's a symptom of your illness. The other issues are at least 18. You have evidence of conduct before the age of 15, so this is a long standing pattern. And it's not exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, so it's not explained by schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. So we've talking about an illness here where the symptoms of the illness, you are diagnosed that's having this illness because you've engaged in behaviors such as doing things that can get you arrested, conning people for profit or pleasure, and being indifferent to other people getting hurt. If you have those three things, you kind of have had that since the pattern of behaviors since before 15, age of 15, then you've got an illness. You have a mental disorder. So then the question is, if you have this mental disorder that you've obviously developed early in life because you had to have the evidence conduct disorder before the age of 15, how much are you actually responsible for your behavior? You have an illness. So why are we treating you like a criminal when you're ill? That's a third question. Should we be treating people like this as having a mental illness versus using the legal system against them? They have an illness. Why don't we treat them like they have an illness and try to treat their illness so that they can go back out into the community? We're putting, as you said, the previous comment of discussion area was, we're putting so much into the treatment of bipolar disorder because of the impacts. Why are we not putting equal if not more amounts of treatment work evidence into the treatment of anti-social personality disorder? It is a disorder. It is a disordered personality that's causing you to act in certain ways. It's not your fault. You have this underlying problem that you developed. You've had all your life, all your adult life. It's not your fault. You have a disorder. Or is it your fault? Even though it's from your, because you have a disorder, you engage in these behaviors. It's your fault because you have this disorder. How does, how do you reconcile that issue of not criminally responsible due to a mental disorder when someone has, when the mental disorder is diagnosed by criminal behavior? I find that a fascinating question. I'd love to hear your thoughts on it. So, anyways, that is the three topics for the week. The idea first of what do you think of the concept of your personality being your disorder? Is it similar to having something like schizophrenia or panic attack? In some ways, we had a discussion about how much of the things like panic attack or depression, similar to the mumps or measles or something like that. Then we move to the discussion about why so much emphasis being put on borderline personality disorder as the, as the one personality disorder that seems to drive so much of the clinical care and the emphasis in clinical settings. And then thirdly, what do you think of the idea of when a mental health disorder is literally defined as engaging in a variety of unlawful acts. No remorse. If you're literally defining the disorder as that, how can the, how can you then say that that person is now responsible for their behavior? So, those are the three topics for this week. This will be the last of the sort of disorders of the week section. The next two weeks are going to be relating to the, sorry, next two weeks are going to be relating to sort of disorders, according to different parts of the age spectrum. So, a variety of disorders that are more prevalent in childhood. And then finally, the last week disorders that are more prevalent in seniors. But this is sort of the last of that general mental health disorders category. So, I hope you're enjoying the course and see you next week. Bye-bye.